doc/source/getting_started.rst, before:

Setting up a chatmail relay
===========================

This section contains everything needed to setup a ready-to-use chatmail relay.
The automated setup is designed and optimized for providing chatmail
addresses for immediate permission-free onboarding through chat apps and bots.
Chatmail addresses are automatically created at first login,
after which the initially specified password is required
for sending and receiving messages through them.


Minimal requirements and prerequisites
--------------------------------------

You will need the following:

-  Control over a domain through a DNS provider of your choice.

-  A Debian 12 server with reachable SMTP/SUBMISSIONS/IMAPS/HTTPS ports.
   IPv6 is encouraged if available. Chatmail relay servers only require
   1GB RAM, one CPU, and perhaps 10GB storage for a few thousand active
   chatmail addresses.

-  Key-based SSH authentication to the root user. You must add a
   passphrase-protected private key to your local ssh-agent because you
   can’t type in your passphrase during deployment. (An ed25519 private
   key is required due to an `upstream bug in
   paramiko <https://github.com/paramiko/paramiko/issues/2191>`_)


Setup with ``scripts/cmdeploy``
-------------------------------------

We use ``chat.example.org`` as the chatmail domain in the following
steps. Please substitute it with your own domain.

1. Setup the initial DNS records. The following is an example in the
   familiar BIND zone file format with a TTL of 1 hour (3600 seconds).
   Please substitute your domain and IP addresses.

   ::

       chat.example.com. 3600 IN A 198.51.100.5
       chat.example.com. 3600 IN AAAA 2001:db8::5
       www.chat.example.com. 3600 IN CNAME chat.example.com.
       mta-sts.chat.example.com. 3600 IN CNAME chat.example.com.

2. On your local PC, clone the repository and bootstrap the Python
   virtualenv.

   ::

       git clone https://github.com/chatmail/relay
       cd relay
       scripts/initenv.sh

3. On your local PC, create chatmail configuration file
   ``chatmail.ini``:

   ::

       scripts/cmdeploy init chat.example.org  # <-- use your domain

4. Verify that SSH root login to your remote server works:

   ::

       ssh root@chat.example.org  # <-- use your domain

5. From your local PC, deploy the remote chatmail relay server:

   ::

       scripts/cmdeploy run

   This script will also check that you have all necessary DNS records.
   If DNS records are missing, it will recommend which you should
   configure at your DNS provider (it can take some time until they are
   public).

Other helpful commands
----------------------

To check the status of your remotely running chatmail service:

::

   scripts/cmdeploy status

To display and check all recommended DNS records:

::

   scripts/cmdeploy dns

To test whether your chatmail service is working correctly:

::

   scripts/cmdeploy test

To measure the performance of your chatmail service:

::

   scripts/cmdeploy bench



Modifying the home page
-----------------------

``cmdeploy run`` also creates default static web pages and deploys them
to a Nginx web server with:

-  a default ``index.html`` along with a QR code that users can click to
   create an address on your chatmail relay

-  a default ``info.html`` that is linked from the home page

-  a default ``policy.html`` that is linked from the home page

All ``.html`` files are generated by the according markdown ``.md`` file
in the ``www/src`` directory.

Refining the web pages
----------------------

::

   scripts/cmdeploy webdev

This starts a local live development cycle for chatmail web pages:

-  uses the ``www/src/page-layout.html`` file for producing static HTML
   pages from ``www/src/*.md`` files

-  continously builds the web presence reading files from ``www/src``
   directory and generating HTML files and copying assets to the
   ``www/build`` directory.

-  Starts a browser window automatically where you can “refresh” as
   needed.

Custom web pages
----------------

You can skip uploading a web page by setting ``www_folder=disabled`` in
``chatmail.ini``.

If you want to manage your web pages outside this git repository, you
can set ``www_folder`` in ``chatmail.ini`` to a custom directory on your
computer. ``cmdeploy run`` will upload it as the server’s home page, and
if it contains a ``src/index.md`` file, will build it with hugo.


Disable automatic address creation
--------------------------------------------------------

If you need to stop address creation, e.g. because some script is wildly
creating addresses, login with ssh and run:

::

       touch /etc/chatmail-nocreate

Chatmail address creation will be denied while this file is present.

Commit message:

Add installation via docker compose (MVP 1)

doc/source/getting_started.rst, after:

Setting up a chatmail relay
===========================

This section contains everything needed to setup a ready-to-use chatmail relay.
The automated setup is designed and optimized for providing chatmail
addresses for immediate permission-free onboarding through chat apps and bots.
Chatmail addresses are automatically created at first login,
after which the initially specified password is required
for sending and receiving messages through them.


Minimal requirements and prerequisites
--------------------------------------

You will need the following:

-  Control over a domain through a DNS provider of your choice.

-  A Debian 12 server with reachable SMTP/SUBMISSIONS/IMAPS/HTTPS ports.
   IPv6 is encouraged if available. Chatmail relay servers only require
   1GB RAM, one CPU, and perhaps 10GB storage for a few thousand active
   chatmail addresses.

-  Key-based SSH authentication to the root user. You must add a
   passphrase-protected private key to your local ssh-agent because you
   can’t type in your passphrase during deployment. (An ed25519 private
   key is required due to an `upstream bug in
   paramiko <https://github.com/paramiko/paramiko/issues/2191>`_)


Setup with ``scripts/cmdeploy``
-------------------------------------

We use ``chat.example.org`` as the chatmail domain in the following
steps. Please substitute it with your own domain.

1. Setup the initial DNS records. The following is an example in the
   familiar BIND zone file format with a TTL of 1 hour (3600 seconds).
   Please substitute your domain and IP addresses.

   ::

       chat.example.com. 3600 IN A 198.51.100.5
       chat.example.com. 3600 IN AAAA 2001:db8::5
       www.chat.example.com. 3600 IN CNAME chat.example.com.
       mta-sts.chat.example.com. 3600 IN CNAME chat.example.com.

2. On your local PC, clone the repository and bootstrap the Python
   virtualenv.

   ::

       git clone https://github.com/chatmail/relay
       cd relay
       scripts/initenv.sh

3. On your local PC, create chatmail configuration file
   ``chatmail.ini``:

   ::

       scripts/cmdeploy init chat.example.org  # <-- use your domain

4. Verify that SSH root login to your remote server works:

   ::

       ssh root@chat.example.org  # <-- use your domain

5. From your local PC, deploy the remote chatmail relay server:

   ::

       scripts/cmdeploy run

   This script will also check that you have all necessary DNS records.
   If DNS records are missing, it will recommend which you should
   configure at your DNS provider (it can take some time until they are
   public).

Docker installation
-------------------

We have experimental support for `docker compose <https://github.com/chatmail/relay/blob/docker-rebase/docs/DOCKER_INSTALLATION_EN.md>`_,
but it is not covered by automated tests yet,
so don't expect everything to work.

Other helpful commands
----------------------

To check the status of your remotely running chatmail service:

::

   scripts/cmdeploy status

To display and check all recommended DNS records:

::

   scripts/cmdeploy dns

To test whether your chatmail service is working correctly:

::

   scripts/cmdeploy test

To measure the performance of your chatmail service:

::

   scripts/cmdeploy bench



Modifying the home page
-----------------------

``cmdeploy run`` also creates default static web pages and deploys them
to a Nginx web server with:

-  a default ``index.html`` along with a QR code that users can click to
   create an address on your chatmail relay

-  a default ``info.html`` that is linked from the home page

-  a default ``policy.html`` that is linked from the home page

All ``.html`` files are generated by the according markdown ``.md`` file
in the ``www/src`` directory.

Refining the web pages
----------------------

::

   scripts/cmdeploy webdev

This starts a local live development cycle for chatmail web pages:

-  uses the ``www/src/page-layout.html`` file for producing static HTML
   pages from ``www/src/*.md`` files

-  continously builds the web presence reading files from ``www/src``
   directory and generating HTML files and copying assets to the
   ``www/build`` directory.

-  Starts a browser window automatically where you can “refresh” as
   needed.

Custom web pages
----------------

You can skip uploading a web page by setting ``www_folder=disabled`` in
``chatmail.ini``.

If you want to manage your web pages outside this git repository, you
can set ``www_folder`` in ``chatmail.ini`` to a custom directory on your
computer. ``cmdeploy run`` will upload it as the server’s home page, and
if it contains a ``src/index.md`` file, will build it with hugo.


Disable automatic address creation
--------------------------------------------------------

If you need to stop address creation, e.g. because some script is wildly
creating addresses, login with ssh and run:

::

       touch /etc/chatmail-nocreate

Chatmail address creation will be denied while this file is present.
